Urgent care centre to open in Surrey in 2019.

A new rapid-access care centre in Surrey — slated to open in 2019 — would streamline access to mental health and substance use services for patients and reduce wait-times to see specialists, says Fraser Health. 

The Surrey Mental Health and Substance Use Urgent Care Response Centre would serve as the first point of contact for patients with mental health issues or drug and alcohol addiction and provide psychiatric assessments and crisis stabilization and support. 

“We realized we need a place where people can come and they don’t have to wait for hours, where they can see people specializing in substance use disorders,” said Dr. Anson Koo, Fraser Health’s chief psychiatrist. 

The centre will also help patients navigate the maze of services available to them, and provide a seamless transition into community-based longer term care. 

“We also realize these are individuals who are vulnerable and need people who can do the heavy lifting for them to get them connected to services and create links to ongoing support,” said Koo. “After they leave the clinic, we want everyone to have a clear plan for what their care is going to be.” 

People can access the centre directly themselves, or care can be initiated by family members. They can also be referred by their family doctor, sparing them lengthy waits to see a psychiatrist, or be brought in by police and other first-responders. 

The urgent care response centre is expected to divert people away from Surrey Memorial Hospital’s emergency department, which last year saw a 16 per cent increase in patients with mental health and substance use issues. 

The centre is a response to the ongoing opioid crisis, but it also has a broader mandate to respond to people with mental health and all substance use disorders, including alcohol and other drugs. 

“Right now the opioid crisis is being talked about more because it has emerged so quickly and so many people are dying,” said Koo, but “this centre will serve all individuals regardless of what substance and what mental health condition they’re struggling with.” 

The facility, which will be housed in an existing building on the Surrey Memorial Hospital campus, will be open 18 hours a day, seven days a week, and will have approximately 45 full-time staff, including psychiatrists, nurses, substance use clinicians, social workers and counsellors. 

Koo said the centre will not be ready until summer 2019 because the building still needs to undergo renovation. Fraser Health also needs to hire specialized staff and finalize the program’s clinical plan. 

The centre is designed to serve Surrey’s growing population, but Fraser Health plans to use this as a model for other urgent-care response centres to be built in other municipalities in its jurisdiction. 

“We fully anticipate that this won’t be the last,” said Koo. “This model will be replicated.”