California wildfires: Rain douses 'most' of blaze that killed 84 and destroyed 19,000 buildings.

A deadly wildfire is nearly contained after several days of rain in Northern California, but searchers are still completing the meticulous task of combing through now-muddy ash and debris for signs of human remains.

Crews planned to resume the grim task today after working on-and-off the day before amid a downpour in the devastated town of Paradise.

Some are now looking through destroyed neighborhoods for a second time as hundreds of people remain unaccounted for. They're searching for telltale fragments or bone or anything that looks like a pile of cremated ashes.

Searchers wore yellow rain slickers and hard hats to protect against falling branches yesterday as they looked for clues that may indicate someone couldn't get out of their home, such as a car in the driveway or a wheelchair ramp.

Craig Covey, who led a team out of Southern California's Orange County, temporarily pulled his 30-member team off the search as heavy rain and wind knocked down trees.

The nation's deadliest wildfire in a century has killed at least 84 people, and 475 are unaccounted for.

Despite the inclement weather, more than 800 volunteers searched for remains on Thanksgiving and again yesterday, two weeks after flames swept through the Sierra Nevada foothills, authorities said.

While rain complicated the search, it also helped nearly extinguish the blaze, said Josh Bischof, operations chief for the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection.

The Camp Fire ignited November 8 and has destroyed nearly 19,000 buildings, most of them homes. That's more than the worst eight fires in California's history combined, the agency said. Thousands of people have been left displaced.

While the rain made everybody colder and wetter, they kept the mission in mind, said Chris Stevens, a search volunteer who wore five layers of clothing to keep warm.

"It doesn't change the spirits of the guys working," he said.

"Everyone here is super committed to helping the folks here."

When Covey and several team members were delayed by rain yesterday, they took two big brown bags full of lunch to 64-year-old Stewart Nugent, who stayed in his home and fought off flames with a garden house, a sprinkler and a shovel. He has been there for two weeks with his cat, Larry.

The first winter storm to hit California has dropped 51mm to 102mm inches of rain over the burn area since it began Wednesday, said Craig Shoemaker with the National Weather Service in Sacramento.

The weather service issued a warning for possible flash flooding and debris flows from areas scarred by major fires in Northern California, including the areas burned in Paradise.

But Shoemaker said the rain didn't fall hard enough yesterday to cause serious problems. Light showers were expected today, he said.

In Southern California, more residents were allowed to return to areas that were evacuated because of the 391-square-kilometre Woolsey Fire as crews worked to repair power, telephone and gas utilities.

About 1100 residents were still under evacuation orders in Malibu and unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County, down from 250,000 at the height of the fire.

The fire erupted amid strong winds November 8 just west of Los Angeles and burned through suburban communities and wilderness parklands to the ocean, leaving vast areas of blackened earth and many homes in ashes.

